---
title: "IGNOU BLIS Previous Year Question Papers"
layout: page
---
[Home](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/)
<br>
<br>
This Page is made possible with the help of [Papataka Book Club](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/) 👈 checkout! 

# IGNOU BLIS Previous Year Questions Subjectwise (2018-2021) [English]
## Exam Pattern
|Subject   |  Part I |   Part II|   Maximum Marks|  Time |   
|---|---|---|---|---|
| BLI221  | Answer any four questions out of six in about 500 words each. (4x10=40Marks)  |   Answer any six questions out of eight in about 250 words each.(6x5=30Marks) |70  |  3 Hours |   
|  BLI222 |   |   |   |   |   
|  BLI223 |   |   |   |   |   
|  BLI225 |   |   |   |   |   
| BLIE226  |   |   |   |   |   
|  BLIE228 |   |   |   |   |   
|  BLIE224 |  Answer any three questions out of five in 250 words each (3×5=15Marks) | Answer any five questions out of eight in 150 words each (5×4=20Marks)  | 35  |1.5 hours (90 Mins)   |   
|  BLIE229 |   |   |   |   |   

---

- [BLI221](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#bli221) | [BLI222](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#bli222) |   
- [BLI223](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#bli223) | [BLI224](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#bli224) |  
- [BLI225](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#bli225) | [BLIE226](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#blie226) | 
- [BLIE228](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#blie228) | [BLIE229](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#blie229) | 
- [Other Resources](https://papatakabookclub.github.io/BLIS-PYQs/#other-resources) |


---

## BLI221
## LIBRARY, INFORMATION AND SOCIETY
### Term-End Examination December, 2021

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**
1. What do you mean by ‘Information Society’ ? Describe in brief the different perceptions of Information Society.
1. Explain the functions of different types of academic libraries
1. Explain the concept of ‘library consortia’. Discuss in detail the activities and services of any two library consortia in India.
1. Explain the need and components of library legislation. Explain the salient features of the West Bengal Public Libraries Act, 1979.
1. Enumerate the categories of LIS professionals and describe the role of any four LIS professionals.
1. Discuss the role of UGC in the development of library and information services in India.


**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**
1. Data Centres
1. Fifth Law of Library Science
1. Right to Information Act, 2005
1. Issues involved in Resource Sharing
1. Services of OCLC
1. Differentiate between Profession and Occupation
1. Ethical Issues for LIS Professionals in Digital Era
1. DESIDOC

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2021


**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**
1. Explain the need, functions and services of a national library.
1. Enumerate the laws of library science. Discuss the implications of 4th and 5th laws with examples.
1. Discuss the need, objectives and components of a library legislation. 
1. Explain the concept of ‘Library Consortia’. Enumerate the library consortia in India and explain any two of them. 
1. Explain the role and activities of American Library Association (ALA) for promotion and development of library profession and professionals. 
1. Explain the role and activities of Raja Rammohan Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF) for the development and promotion of public libraries in India.


**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**
1. Knowledge Society 
1. Referral Centres and Clearing Houses 
1. West Bengal Public Libraries Act, 1979 
1. INFLIBNET 
1. Hybrid Library 
1. Librarianship as a profession 
1. Professional Ethics 
1. Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP)


---

## BLI222
## INFORMATION SOURCES AND SERVICES
### Term-End Examination December, 2021

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. Discuss the importance of institutions as sources of information. Describe the activities of academic institutions and learned societies.
1. What do you understand by Web-based/ Internet-based library services ? Describe in detail.
1. Define user studies and describe the steps involved in their planning.
1. Enumerate the major international agencies that are sources of information. Discuss the role of UNESCO as a vital source of information.
1. What do you understand by anticipatory information services ? Describe in detail.
1. Define the term ‘virtual reference service’. What are the advantages and limitations of offering such service in a library ?

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Differentiate between reference and information services.
1. Discuss the need for value-added information services.
1. Briefly describe an encyclopedia with suitable examples.
1. Discuss the negative influences of the information generated by mass media.
1. Explain the concept of marketing mix in library and information centres.
1. How would you evaluate a dictionary ?
1. Discuss web-based services with suitable examples.
1. Describe the functions of a trade representative.

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2021

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**
1. Enumerate the types of databases available for online searching. Discuss any two online database search service providers.
1. Explain how common people can perform the functions of information disseminators.
1. Describe the activities of an NGO that make it an information provider.
1. List the components of mass media. Explain with examples the kind of information generated by each of these components.
1. Define the concept of user education. Describe the methods of conducting user education programmes in libraries.
1. Discuss the various categories of condensation type of services. 


**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Distinguish between ‘Everyday Information Needs’ and ‘Current Information Needs’.
2. What do you understand by Information Processors ? 
2. Define Information Literacy and discuss its needs. 
2. Highlight the emerging trends in database services. 
2. Explain the importance of electronic source-based information use studies. 
2. What do you understand by ‘Invisible Colleges’ ? 
2. Write a brief note on Marketing Mix. 
2. Discuss the recent trends in current information services.




---

## BLI223
## ORGANISING AND MANAGING INFORMATION
### Term-End Examination December, 2021

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. Define library classification. Explain its uses in a library and information centre.
2. Illustrate with examples the canons for formation of classes in the Idea Plane.
3. Explain the features, advantages and problems of classified catalogues in libraries.
4. What is MARC ? Explain the structure of a MARC 21 record.
5. Explain the purpose and methods of evaluating an information indexing system.
6. What is an OPAC ? How does it work as a search tool ?

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. State the features of DDC. 
2. State the advantages of a dictionary catalogue. 
3. Explain briefly the various methods of web indexing. 
4. Illustrate the various steps in POPSI indexing. 
5. State the original principles of subject indexing given by C. A. Cutter. 
6. State with examples the canons for formation of chains of classes in the idea plane. 
7. Explain the rules in AACR-2 for cataloguing of conference proceedings. 
8. Illustrate the need and purpose of ‘see’ entries in a thesaurus. 

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2021
**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**
1. Define Library Classification. Explain with examples that classification is the basis of library services. 
1. What is Notation ? Explain the qualities of a good notation for library classification.
1. Make a comparative study of the nature, advantages and problems of Dictionary and Classified Catalogues. 
1. Explain the origin, purpose and structure of ISBD records. 
1. Illustrate the features and working of the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH).
1. Explain the concept of metadata along with its types.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Discuss the Canons for Terminology. 
2. Describe the notation used in UDC. 
2. What is a Shelf List ? Differentiate it with library catalogue. 
2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of sheaf form of catalogue. 
2. Discuss the problems of subject indexing. 
2. State the associative relationships in a thesaurus. Describe any two by giving examples. 
2. Describe the concepts associated with Simple Knowledge Organisation System (SKOS). 
2. What is an Ontology ? Describe different types of ontologies.

---




---

## BLI224
## ICT FUNDAMENTALS


---

## BLI225
## COMMUNICATION SKILLS

---

## BLIE226
## MANAGEMENT OF LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTRE

---

## BLIE228
## INFORMATION PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
### Term-End Examination December, 2021
**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. What do you understand by subject approach in literature search ? Explain steps involved in it with examples.
1. What is an adhoc bibliography ? Discuss its functions and steps involved in its preparation.
1.  What is selective dissemination of information (SDI) service ? Explain the steps involved in providing it.
1. What is an abstracting periodical ? Discuss its need and purpose.
1. Define information analysis and synthesis. Describe the steps involved in it.
1.  Discuss the 7 P’s of marketing of services in the context of web marketing.


**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Differentiate between a single source digest and a multiple source digest. List the components of a digest.
1. Describe how would you organise a newspaper clipping service.
1. What is consolidated information ? Describe the process of information consolidation.
1. Explain the concepts of packaging and repackaging of information.
1. Describe the guidelines for the effective presentation and layout of a technical digest.
1. Enumerate the services of British Library Document Supply Centre (BLDSC). Describe any two of these.
1. Enumerate different web-based information sharing services. Describe any two of these services.
1. Discuss issues and challenges associated with quality web content.

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2021
**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. What is meant by Current Awareness Service (CAS) ? Describe the steps of preparing Current Contents type of CAS.
1. Describe how you can provide SDI service to your users. Illustrate with the help of a flowchart.
1. Define technical digest. Describe its various categories.
1. Write an essay on translation services in India.
1. What is social networking ? Describe the features of any three social networking sites.
1. Explain the concept of web marketing mix.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Describe the different ways of arranging entries in an adhoc bibliography. 
1. What information do you need for compilation of a list of forthcoming conferences ? 
1. Describe the functions and uses of Reviews. 
1. Describe the factors that determine the efficiency of document delivery service. 
1. Describe various species of Blogs. 
1. Describe the salient features of LibraryThing, GuruLib and Revish. 
1. Discuss the features of web collaborative tools.
1. Describe the items covered in a web marketing plan for a library.

---

### Term-End Examination December, 2020
**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. Describe the steps involved in compilation of an adhoc bibliography. Give three examples.
2. What is SDI ? Describe its components.
3. What do you understand by referral service ? Explain its need and the tools required for this service.
4. What do you understand by Information analysis and synthesis ? Describe its various steps.
5. What is document delivery service ? Describe different types of document delivery service models. 
6. Describe some popular web-based services.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Describe the procedure for compilation of a bibliography following author approach.
2. Describe the method of feedback analysis of SDI service. 
3. Describe the steps involved in preparing an abstract.
4. Differentiate between trend reports and technical digests. 
5. Discuss machine translation research in India.
6. Discuss the concept of collaborative content development. 
7. Explain e-marketing. 
8. What is an abstract ? Describe its types with features.

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2020


- **OBJECTIVE PAPER, OMR**

---

### Term-End Examination December, 2019

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**


1. What is Current Awareness Service (CAS) ? Describe its characteristics.
2. What is Newspaper Clipping Service ? Enumerate its types and describe the steps in organizing the service.
3. Explain the meaning and need of technical digests. Describe their categories and the component of information they should contain.
4. What do you understand by electronic document delivery systems and services (EDDS) ? Describe the document delivery system of E-journal publishers and library consortia.
5. What is Machine Translation (MT) ? Describe different techniques of MT systems.
6. Describe the features of social networking websites. Discuss how Web 2.0 features can be used in libraries.


**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. How will you ascertain the 'Topic' of literature search from the query avoiding ambiguity ?
1. Describe the steps in preparing an informative abstract of a document.
1. Discuss the functions and uses of Reviews.
1. Describe the features of Wikipedia, Wikinews and Wiktionary.
1. Describe the features of Moodie.
1. Describe the interlibrary loan service of OCLC.
1. Discuss Web marketing mix.
1. Discuss the quality based issues involved in Website design.

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2019

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. What is meant by literature search ? Describe the techniques of literature search by subject.
1. What is a digest ? Describe the components of a digest.
3. Define information consolidation. Briefly describe the process associated with information analysis and consolidation.
4. What do you understand by Document Delivery Service (DDS) ? Explain the factors that govern the efficiency of DDS. 
5. What is Lib 2.0 ? Describe the features of Gurulib and Revish.
6. What is meant by Content Management System ? Enumerate different types of content management system and describe the features of any two of them.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Describe the steps in providing current contents type of current Awareness Service.
2. Mention the difference between a library, information centre and information analysis centre. Describe the attributes by which information analysis centre can be identified.
3. Differentiate between trend reports and technical digests.
4. Describe in brief Ariel Inter-Library Loan Software.
5. Discuss the role of IFLA in solving the problems faced by document delivery service operators.
6. Describe the translation activities in humanities and social sciences in India.
7. Discuss the pattern of web marketing of library and information services.
8. Discuss the concept of collaborative content development and also the features of collaboration tools.

---

### Term-End Examination December, 2018

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. What is meant by title announcement service ? Explain how will you provide such a service in a
library.
1. Distinguish referral service from reference service. Describe the online tools used in providing referral service.
1. Enumerate the different categories of information consolidation products. Discuss the types, functions and uses of reviews.
1. Describe the translation activities in the area of  humanities and social sciences in India.
1. Distinguish between information center and  information analysis center. Discuss the types of services offered by information analysis centers in India.
1. What is content management system ? Explain  the collaborative content development system with examples.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**

1. Author approach is an effective approach for compilation of a bibliography - Explain.
2. What is an abstract ? Describe its types.
2. Explain the concept of packaging and  repackaging of information.
2. Describe inter-library loan service of Online  Computer Library Center (OCLC).
2. Discuss the status of machine translation research  in India.
2. What are the points to be considered towards best  practices for the development of collaborative content ?
2. Explain the steps involved in the analysis and  synthesis of information.
2. Discuss some common graphic file formats.

---

### Term-End Examination June, 2018

**Part-I Answer any four, in about 500 words each. (4*10=40)**

1. What do you understand by the subject approach of literature search ? Explain the different steps involved in subject approach with examples.
1. Describe newspaper clipping service. Discuss how it is organised in a library.
1. Define the term 'Information Consolidation'. Discuss the various processes of information consolidation with the help of a diagram.
1. What is an electronic document delivery service ? Discuss how electronic document delivery service is provided by some of the e-journal service providers.
1. What do you understand by Web 2.0 ? Discuss web-based library services with the help of
examples.
1. Explain the concept of web marketing mix.

**Part-II Answer any six, in about 250 words each. (6*5=30)**
1. Describe the characteristics of current awareness service.
2. Discuss with examples some of the online union catalogues as a source of information.
2. Describe the factors responsible for the efficiency of document delivery service.
2. Elaborate on the different types of machine translation systems.
2. Discuss some of the quality based issues involved in website design.
2. Describe the characteristics of Web 2.0.
2. Explain how the web has changed the traditional marketing concept.
2. Define technical digest and discuss its need.

---

## BLIE229
## ICT IN LIBRARIES


---

## Other Resources

- [All Questions Papers in pdf Format](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1BIMOrfe4V7dkgrXs7-A0Y1Xoz6ISGQRf?usp=sharing)

